
									Parkinson’s Disease detection using ML
 
Team Members:
 
Sreevarshan S (TL)
Vinith Kumar S
Vishwa S
Sreehari Pranesh K
 
1.Abstract: 

The Parkinson’s disease is progressive neuro degenerative disorder that affects a lot only people significantly affecting their quality of life. It mostly affect the motor functions of human. The main motor symptoms are called "parkinsonism" or "parkinsonian syndrome". 
 
The symptoms of Parkinson’s disease will occur slowly, the symptoms include shaking, rigidity, slowness of movement and difficulty with walking, Thinking and behavior change, Depression and anxiety are also common. There is a model for detecting Parkinson’s using voice. The deflections in the voice will confirm the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. This project showed 73.8% efficiency. In our model, a huge amount of data is collected from the normal person and also previously affected person by Parkinson’s disease. these data is trained using machine learning algorithms. From the whole data 60% is used for training and 40% is used for testing. The data of any person can be entered in db to check whether the person is affected by Parkinsons disease or not. There are 24 columns in the data set each column will indicate the symptom values of a patient except the status column. The status column has 0's and I's.those values will decide the person is effected with Parkinsons disease. I's indicate person is effected, 0's indicate normal conditions. 
 
Introduction: Parkinson's disease symptoms can be different for everyone. Early signs are mild that goes unnoticed. Symptoms usually begin on one side of your body and gets worsen on that side, afterwards it affects both the sides. 
 
Parkinson's symptoms may include 
1.Tremor Slowed movement Rigid muscles. 
2.Impaired posture and balance. · 
3.Loss of automatic movements · 
4.Speech changes ·
5.Writing changes
 
The Parkinson's disease is due to a loss of neurons that produce a chemical messenger in the brain called dopamine. when there is a decrease in level of the amino acid named dopamine it leads to the abnormal brain activity, which leads to Parkinson’s disease. The cause of Parkinson's disease is still a question mark, but several factors appear to play a role, including: · Genes · Environmental · Triggers As a result people suffer from this disease for many years before diagnosis. The estimated results have shown that there are 7-10 million people are affected by parkinson’s disease worldwide. People with age above 50 are the one’s who has the higher possibility of getting parkinson’s disease but still an estimated 4 percentage of people who are under the age 50 are diagnosed with parkinson’s disease. There is no cure or prevention for PD. However, the disease can be controlled in early stage. The data mining techniques is used as a effective way for early detection and diagnosis of the disease. Data mining techniques in medicine is a research area that combines sophisticated representational and computing techniques with the insights of expert physicians to produce tools for improving health care.Data mining is a statistical method for finding hidden patterns in datasets by constructing predictive or classification models that can be learned from past experience and applied in future cases, so there is a need for a more accurate, objective means of early detection, ideally one which can be used by individuals in their home setting.
 
2.Social Impacts of Parkinson’s Disease:
Reduced Ability To Form Facial Expressions
One of the motor symptoms associated with Parkinson’s is a mask-like expression. Socialization involves a combination of verbal and nonverbal communication, and with Parkinson’s, many nonverbal clues aren’t present because the disease affects the facial muscles. The reduced facial expressions could lead to communication challenges and negatively affect some social relationships. Medications and rehabilitation are ways seniors with Parkinson’s can address this issue and enhance their interactions with others.
Mood Swings
Seniors with Parkinson’s are at higher risk for depression due to mood swings caused by feelings of helplessness, pessimism, restlessness, and other issues. If your senior loved one is depressed, he or she may feel like withdrawing from social activities, and it could be challenging to motivate him or her to do anything. Help your loved one manage negative emotions by focusing on positive activities. You should also speak with his or her primary care physician to see what treatments are available to relieve mood disorders, including anxiety and depression.
Muscular Problems
Going out and enjoying a social event with friends or participating in physical activities that provide socialization may become difficult as Parkinson’s progresses. Your loved one might experience stiff muscles, poor balance, slow movements, and joint pain that cause him or her to live an isolated and sedentary lifestyle. It’s crucial to remain physically and socially active to slow the progression of Parkinson’s and boost quality of life. If muscular problems are keeping your loved one isolated, consider attending social outings together to provide the support and reassurance he or she needs. You can also purchase walking devices that make getting around a little easier.
The symptoms of Parkinson’s disease can be difficult to manage, and family caregivers can easily get overwhelmed. Caring for a senior loved one can be challenging for families who don’t have expertise or professional training in home care, but this challenge doesn’t have to be faced alone. 
Cognitive Issues
Amnesia and dementia are common in older adults who have Parkinson’s, causing them to become confused or forget important people, places, and things in their lives. When this happens, they’re more likely to withdraw from social outings because they’re worried about the inability to understand what’s going on around them. Unclear speaking is also a symptom of Parkinson’s, so seniors might feel embarrassed by their slurred speech, withdraw from family and friends, and turn to isolation as a result. Encourage your loved one to do activities that increase cognition and speaking abilities, such as puzzles, brain games, and speech therapy.
Many seniors in the later stages of Parkinson’s can continue to live at home, but they’ll likely need assistance from a family member or other caregiver to do so safely.
 

3.feasibility of idea:
 
Aim of the Project: The main aim is to test the ability of motor function of the patient with Parkinson’s disease. 
 
Scope of the Project: The scope of this project is to show the high accuracy of detecting Parkinson’s disease in early stage. 
 
Existing System: In existing system, PD is detected at the secondary stage only (Dopamine deficiency) which leads to medical challenges. Also doctor has to manually examine and suggest medical diagnosis in which the symptoms might vary from person to person so suggesting medicine is also a challenge. Thus the mental disorders are been poorly characterized and have many health complications. PD is generally diagnosed with the following clinical methods as, ·
 
MRI or CT scan - Conventional MRI cannot detect early signs of Parkinson's disease · 
PET scan - is used to assess activity and function of brain regions involved in movement ·
SPECT scan - can reveal changes in brain chemistry, such as a decrease in dopamine This results in a high misdiagnosis rate (up to 25% by non-specialists) and many years before diagnosis, people can have the disease. Thus existing system is not effective in early prediction and accurate medicinal diagnosis to the affected people.
 
By using machine learning techniques, the problem can be solved with minimal error rate. The voice dataset of Parkinson's disease from the UCI Machine learning library is used as input. Also our proposed system provides accurate results by integrating spiral drawing inputs of normal and Parkinson’s affected patients. We propose a hybrid and accurate results analyzing patient both voice and spiral drawing data’s. Thus combining both the results, the doctor can conclude normality or abnormality and prescribe the medicine based on the affected stage.
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED METHOD:
By using machine learning techniques, the problem can be solved with minimal error rate. The voice dataset of Parkinson's disease from the UCI Machine learning library is used as input. Also our proposed system provides accurate results by integrating spiral drawing inputs of normal and Parkinson’s affected patients. We propose a hybrid and accurate results analyzing patient both voice and spiral drawing data’s. Thus combining both the results, the doctor can conclude normality or abnormality and prescribe the medicine based on the affected stage
 
 
4.MODULE DESCRIPTION: 
 
PARKINSON’S DISEASE VOICE DATASET ANALYSIS 
 
PD voice dataset is collected from UCI machine learning repository and these are stored into the RStudio environment as Testing and Training datasets. These are stored into the RStudio environment as Testing and Training datasets. R is a programming language and software environment for statistical analysis, graphics representation, data analysis and as well as machine learning. It involves the following steps and procedures,
 
1.Importing data to RStudio - organize the data in an Excel worksheet to include column names in the first row (i.e. person’s voice collected at various time zones) and each subsequent row contains all the information (i.e. set of 22 parameter is taken into consideration and the person’s voice range for those parameters is tested and then noted), finally the status column shows two values 0 (healthy) and 1(affected). Import data into RStudio, using the "Import data..." feature. 
 
2.Clustering (k-means) - An unsupervised learning algorithm that tries to cluster data based on their similarity, and just tries to find patterns in the data. Here, we have to specify the number of clusters we want the data to be grouped into and then the algorithm randomly assigns each observation to a cluster, and finds the centroid of each cluster and then, it iterates by reassigning data points to the cluster whose centroid is closest and calculates new centroid of each cluster. 
 
3.Classification (Decision Tree) – It is also called a prediction tree. It uses a structure to specify sequences of decisions and consequences, the goal is to predict a response or output.The forecast can be accomplished by creating a decision tree with test points and branches.At each check point, a decision is made to pick a particular branch and cross the trees and can be used in a variety of disciplines, on the basis of individual characteristics.
 
4.Predicted Output - The predicted output for voice data analysis based on clustering and classification is with an accuracy of 88%.
 
 
CONCLUSION: 
	Previous review papers provides a comprehensive survey of relevant neuroimaging modalities and associated analysis techniques presented in the recent years for diagnosing Parkinson’s disease. Previous review papers have focused only on a particular imaging modality such as MRI or PET, or on one specific type of dementia only such as AD. This project aimed to cover a broader space of imaging and machine learning technologies for mental illness diagnostics such that researchers in the field could readily identify the state of the art in the domain. Moreover, we emphasize the importance of early detection and prediction of Parkinson’s disease, such that treatment and support can be provided to patients as soon as possible.
